JUDY WOODRUFF: Earlier this
month, Walter Shaub resigned
as director of the federal
Office of Government
Ethics, a position he's
held since January 2013.
In the final months of his
tenure, Shaub clashed with the
Trump administration on a number
of ethics issues.
Currently, he is senior
director of ethics for the
nonprofit Campaign Legal Center.
And Mr. Shaub joins me now.
Thank you for being
here at the "NewsHour."
So, you had been -- you were
just telling me you had been
at the Office of Government
Ethics for, what, 15, 16 years?
WALTER SHAUB, Campaign
Legal Center: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Leading up
to your decision to resign.
You had another six months to
go as director of the office.
Why leave?
Why not stay until
the end, next January?
WALTER SHAUB: Well, first of
all, thanks for having me.
I started at OGE in 2001 and
have served there continuously,
except for two years, when I
left.
I have seen OGE operate
under three different
presidential administrations
right now, including
the administrations of President
Bush and President Obama, who
were incredibly supportive
of the ethics program.
Both of those administrations
really supported OGE
in absolutely every
way they could, and
our work functioned
very smoothly.
In the past eight
months, we have departed
from ethical norms.
And the program is under
significant pressure
from the White House
that has set a tone there
the top that ethics
doesn't matter.
And so I did all I could,
and I reached a point where
I thought there wasn't more I
could achieve from inside.
But, by leaving, I would
actually have more freedom to
continue to try to push for the
restoration of our
ethics program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you have
been speaking out since then.
Give us an example of the way or
ways that this administration,
as you say, was putting
stress on the ethics procedures.
WALTER SHAUB: Well, in one
way, it really began with the
president declaring that he's
not going to divest his
financial interests.
And that means there is a
cloud over all government
decision-making that
stems from the president,
because you can't know whether
his decisions are being made
on the basis of policy aims
or on the basis of
financial interests.
And when he travels to all of
his properties on a frequent
basis, he's giving each of them
free advertisements, and he
speaks freely about those.
He could have, instead,
divested his interests and
told his administration
to stay away there
his properties, which would
have kept some of the foreign
governments or charities or
businesses that have booked his
business -- his properties to
be closer to the president not
to do that.
I think a lot of things happen
on a day-to-day basis as well.
I fought a battle that took
over a month to get them to
release some waivers that they
had been issuing, and OGE's
collection of waivers...
JUDY WOODRUFF: To individuals.
WALTER SHAUB: To
individual appointees.
And OGE's collection of waivers
and other ethics documents
has been a routine function
of OGE's program dating all
the way back to its beginning.
OGE is by statute the
supervising Ethics Office.
When I finally got the waivers,
I was shocked to see that a
number of them, most of them,
actually, were unsigned,
undated, either explicitly
or implicitly retroactive,
and two of them
were issued by the counselor
of the president to a group of
people that included himself.
So, that's about as bad an
ethics program as you can run.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, now you
know that -- what the White
House has been saying since you
left your position.
They were criticizing
you before.
They have been
criticizing since.
They say you have been
talking to the news media.
I saw one quote where they
said you were "grandstanding,"
that you're trying to
give additional powers
to the Ethics Office
that it never had before.
WALTER SHAUB: Well, I
do think that, based
on recent experiences,
the Ethics Office needs
more power than it's had before,
because its functions depended
on a White House that wanted
to support the ethics program.
So, when they threw roadblocks
in the way of the supervising
Ethics Office's ability
to again access to
routine ethics documents,
that was a clear signal
that OGE didn't have
enough ability to
carry out its mission.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then very
recently, Walter Shaub, you
have spoken out about the person
who has been named the
acting director of the
Ethics Office since you left.
Why the concern there?
WALTER SHAUB: So, you know, I
want to make clear that I think
that individual, Dave Apol,
is a good person and
an excellent attorney.
I hired him because he has got
a particular viewpoint, which
is at odds with the traditional
interpretation of the ethics
role that OGE has always had,
because I wanted diversity
of opinion.
And it worked well while I was
in charge because I had two see
senior officials who had very
differing opinions, and we
could have robust debate.
And Dave was always
very respectful when a
decision was finally made.
But I am concerned that he has
a particular outlook, that he
would wind up loosening the
ethics rules and
OGE's interpretations.
And, to be clear, I would have
no problem if they nominated
him, so the Senate could
vet these viewpoints.
But I think that the
administration did
an end-run around the
natural succession of the
chief of staff to appoint
one of her subordinates
as acting director in
order to avoid the Senate
confirmation process and have
someone in the office who is
sympathetic to their views.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just
very quickly, in the
time that we have left,
you are trying now, as
we said, to beef up the
Office of Government Ethics.
You're working with members
of Congress from both
political parties to do this.
Just in a quick nutshell,
what do you think needs to
be done, needs to be added?
WALTER SHAUB: So, there's a
number of measures I'm proposing
to try to get OGE a little bit
more independence, including
the ability to gather records
and information, if necessary,
by issuing subpoenas.
I also think that there's
a number of tweaks that can
be done to the ethics rules.
And, ultimately, I would like
to see some accountability
for resolving presidential
conflicts of interest.
That last one might be a
tougher sell, but some of the
proposals are technical enough
that they shouldn't
be controversial.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I hope
we can stay in touch with
you as you work on this.
Walter Shaub, the former
director of the office
of Government Ethics,
thank you very much.
WALTER SHAUB: Thanks
for having me.